## Alternative Approaches {#sec:related}

Using an intermediate representation (IR), such as Java\texttrademark\ bytecode or Microsoft IL, is a common method for performing operations on multilingual code bases. This allows code analysis tools to be built around the language(s) defined by the IR rather than having to deal with each of the different languages individually. However, using an IR doesn't work when analyzing systems created from languages that do not share a common IR \cite{linosMetricsToolMultilanguage}. Using an IR also doesn't work if performing manipulations of source code or if there isn't a clear correspondence between a source language and its IR. An example of this can be seen for PIT \cite{colesPITPracticalMutation2016}, a Java mutation testing framework. Even though their system is designed around transforming and manipulating Java bytecode, the system struggles with handling bytecode generated by other JVM languages. However, they still have had limited success with other JVM languages \cite{clarkeExperimentingMutationTesting2016}.

Another approach that's been developed for analyzing multilingual systems is through the use of a separate parser for each language. Constructing and integrating each parser for each language can be both difficult and time consuming, and thus it is better to use existing parsers \cite{janesHowCalculateSoftware2013}. Using existing parsers, one can modify the abstract syntax trees into a language independent form. The problem one contends with in this approach is these parsers may be written in a variety of languages. The use of an existing Island Grammar \cite{synytskyyRobustMultilingualParsing2003} may alleviate these issues, but typically they tend to be specific to their particular problem and their construction is currently a time-consuming manual process.
