## Related Studies {#sec:related}

Using an intermediate representation (IR), such as Java\texttrademark\ bytecode or Microsoft IL, is a common method for performing operations on multilingual code bases. This allows code analysis tools to be built around the language(s) defined by the IR rather than having to deal with each of the different languages individually. However, using an IR doesn't work when analyzing systems build from languages that don't have a common IR. Using an IR also doesn't work if performing manipulations of source code or if there isn't a clear correspondence between a source language and its IR. An example of this can be seen for PIT \cite{coles_pit:_2016}, a Java mutation testing framework. Even though their system is designed around transforming and manipulating java bytecode, the system struggles with handling bytecode generated by other JVM languages. However, they still have had limited success with other JVM languages.

Another approach that's been developed for handling multilingual systems is to use a separate parser for each language. Writing such a parser for each language is can be difficult, and thus it is better to use existing parsers \cite{petrinja_how_2013}. Using existing parsers, one can modify the abstract syntax trees into a language independent form. [X] The problem with this approach is you have to use existing parsers, which might be written in a variety of languages.

Another approach for multilingual systems focuses on using island grammars. Using an Island Grammar approach, one can build a multilingual parser specially designed for code composed of interleaved languages \cite{synytskyy_robust_2003}. This particular work inspired this research. However, island grammar's tend to be specific to their particular problem and their construction is currently a time-consuming manual process.
